The Project Gutenberg eBook of On the Origin of Species, by Charles Darwin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: On the Origin of Species
       6th Edition

Author: Charles Darwin

Release Date: December, 1999 [eBook #2009]
[Most recently updated: October 13, 2021]

Language: English


Produced by: Sue Asscher and David Widger

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES ***


There are several editions of this ebook in the Project Gutenberg
collection. Various characteristics of each ebook are listed to aid in
selecting the preferred file.
Click on any of the filenumbers below to quickly view each ebook.

1228    1859, First Edition
22764   1860, Second Edition
2009    1872, Sixth Edition, considered the definitive edition.




On the Origin of Species

BY MEANS OF NATURAL SELECTION,

OR THE PRESERVATION OF FAVOURED RACES IN THE STRUGGLE FOR LIFE.

By Charles Darwin, M.A., F.R.S.,

Author of “The Descent of Man,” etc., etc.

Sixth London Edition, with all Additions and Corrections.




“But with regard to the material world, we can at least go so far as
this—we can perceive that events are brought about not by insulated
interpositions of Divine power, exerted in each particular case, but by
the establishment of general laws.”

WHEWELL: _Bridgewater Treatise_.


“The only distinct meaning of the word ‘natural’ is _stated_, _fixed_
or _settled;_ since what is natural as much requires and presupposes an
intelligent agent to render it so, _i.e._, to effect it continually or
at stated times, as what is supernatural or miraculous does to effect
it for once.”

BUTLER: _Analogy of Revealed Religion_.


“To conclude, therefore, let no man out of a weak conceit of sobriety,
or an ill-applied moderation, think or maintain, that a man can search
too far or be too well studied in the book of God’s word, or in the
book of God’s works; divinity or philosophy; but rather let men
endeavour an endless progress or proficience in both.”

BACON: _Advancement of Learning_.




AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE PROGRESS OF OPINION ON THE ORIGIN OF
SPECIES, PREVIOUSLY TO THE PUBLICATION OF THE FIRST EDITION OF THIS
WORK.


I will here give a brief sketch of the progress of opinion on the
Origin of Species. Until recently the great majority of naturalists
believed that species were immutable productions, and had been
separately created. This view has been ably maintained by many authors.
Some few naturalists, on the other hand, have believed that species
undergo modification, and that the existing forms of life are the
descendants by true generation of pre existing forms. Passing over
allusions to the subject in the classical writers,[1] the first author
who in modern times has treated it in a scientific spirit was Buffon.
But as his opinions fluctuated greatly at different periods, and as he
does not enter on the causes or means of the transformation of species,
I need not here enter on details.

 [1] Aristotle, in his “Physicæ Auscultationes” (lib.2, cap.8, s.2),
 after remarking that rain does not fall in order to make the corn
 grow, any more than it falls to spoil the farmer’s corn when threshed
 out of doors, applies the same argument to organisation; and adds (as
 translated by Mr. Clair Grece, who first pointed out the passage to
 me), “So what hinders the different parts (of the body) from having
 this merely accidental relation in nature? as the teeth, for example,
 grow by necessity, the front ones sharp, adapted for dividing, and the
 grinders flat, and serviceable for masticating the food; since they
 were not made for the sake of this, but it was the result of accident.
 And in like manner as to other parts in which there appears to exist
 an adaptation to an end. Wheresoever, therefore, all things together
 (that is all the parts of one whole) happened like as if they were
 made for the sake of something, these were preserved, having been
 appropriately constituted by an internal spontaneity; and whatsoever
 things were not thus constituted, perished and still perish.” We here
 see the principle of natural selection shadowed forth, but how little
 Aristotle fully comprehended the principle, is shown by his remarks on
 the formation of the teeth.


Lamarck was the first man whose conclusions on the subject excited much
attention. This justly celebrated naturalist first published his views
in 1801; he much enlarged them in 1809 in his “Philosophie Zoologique”,
and subsequently, 1815, in the Introduction to his “Hist. Nat. des
Animaux sans Vertébres”. In these works he up holds the doctrine that
all species, including man, are descended from other species. He first
did the eminent service of arousing attention to the probability of all
change in the organic, as well as in the inorganic world, being the
result of law, and not of miraculous interposition. Lamarck seems to
have been chiefly led to his conclusion on the gradual change of
species, by the difficulty of distinguishing species and varieties, by
the almost perfect gradation of forms in certain groups, and by the
analogy of domestic productions. With respect to the means of
modification, he attributed something to the direct action of the
physical conditions of life, something to the crossing of already
existing forms, and much to use and disuse, that is, to the effects of
habit. To this latter agency he seems to attribute all the beautiful
adaptations in nature; such as the long neck of the giraffe for
browsing on the branches of trees. But he likewise believed in a law of
progressive development, and as all the forms of life thus tend to
progress, in order to account for the existence at the present day of
simple productions, he maintains that such forms are now spontaneously
generated.[2]

 [2] I have taken the date of the first publication of Lamarck from
 Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire’s (“Hist. Nat. Générale”, tom. ii. page
 405, 1859) excellent history of opinion on this subject. In this work
 a full account is given of Buffon’s conclusions on the same subject.
 It is curious how largely my grandfather, Dr. Erasmus Darwin,
 anticipated the views and erroneous grounds of opinion of Lamarck in
 his “Zoonomia” (vol. i. pages 500-510), published in 1794. According
 to Isid. Geoffroy there is no doubt that Goethe was an extreme
 partisan of similar views, as shown in the introduction to a work
 written in 1794 and 1795, but not published till long afterward; he
 has pointedly remarked (“Goethe als Naturforscher”, von Dr. Karl
 Meding, s. 34) that the future question for naturalists will be how,
 for instance, cattle got their horns and not for what they are used.
 It is rather a singular instance of the manner in which similar views
 arise at about the same time, that Goethe in Germany, Dr. Darwin in
 England, and Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire (as we shall immediately see) in
 France, came to the same conclusion on the origin of species, in the
 years 1794-5.


Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, as is stated in his “Life”, written by his son,
suspected, as early as 1795, that what we call species are various
degenerations of the same type. It was not until 1828 that he published
his conviction that the same forms have not been perpetuated since the
origin of all things. Geoffroy seems to have relied chiefly on the
conditions of life, or the “_monde ambiant_” as the cause of change. He
was cautious in drawing conclusions, and did not believe that existing
species are now undergoing modification; and, as his son adds, “C’est
donc un problème à réserver entièrement à l’avenir, supposé même que
l’avenir doive avoir prise sur lui.”

In 1813 Dr. W.C. Wells read before the Royal Society “An Account of a
White Female, part of whose skin resembles that of a Negro”; but his
paper was not published until his famous “Two Essays upon Dew and
Single Vision” appeared in 1818. In this paper he distinctly recognises
the principle of natural selection, and this is the first recognition
which has been indicated; but he applies it only to the races of man,
and to certain characters alone. After remarking that negroes and
mulattoes enjoy an immunity from certain tropical diseases, he
observes, firstly, that all animals tend to vary in some degree, and,
secondly, that agriculturists improve their domesticated animals by
selection; and then, he adds, but what is done in this latter case “by
art, seems to be done with equal efficacy, though more slowly, by
nature, in the formation of varieties of mankind, fitted for the
country which they inhabit. Of the accidental varieties of man, which
would occur among the first few and scattered inhabitants of the middle
regions of Africa, some one would be better fitted than others to bear
the diseases of the country. This race would consequently multiply,
while the others would decrease; not only from their in ability to
sustain the attacks of disease, but from their incapacity of contending
with their more vigorous neighbours. The colour of this vigorous race I
take for granted, from what has been already said, would be dark. But
the same disposition to form varieties still existing, a darker and a
darker race would in the course of time occur: and as the darkest would
be the best fitted for the climate, this would at length become the
most prevalent, if not the only race, in the particular country in
which it had originated.” He then extends these same views to the white
inhabitants of colder climates. I am indebted to Mr. Rowley, of the
United States, for having called my attention, through Mr. Brace, to
the above passage of Dr. Wells’ work.

The Hon. and Rev. W. Herbert, afterward Dean of Manchester, in the
fourth volume of the “Horticultural Transactions”, 1822, and in his
work on the “Amaryllidaceæ” (1837, pages 19, 339), declares that
“horticultural experiments have established, beyond the possibility of
refutation, that botanical species are only a higher and more permanent
class of varieties.” He extends the same view to animals. The dean
believes that single species of each genus were created in an
originally highly plastic condition, and that these have produced,
chiefly by inter-crossing, but likewise by variation, all our existing
species.

In 1826 Professor Grant, in the concluding paragraph in his well-known
paper (“Edinburgh Philosophical Journal”, vol. XIV, page 283) on the
Spongilla, clearly declares his belief that species are descended from
other species, and that they become improved in the course of
modification. This same view was given in his Fifty-fifth Lecture,
published in the “Lancet” in 1834.

In 1831 Mr. Patrick Matthew published his work on “Naval Timber and
Arboriculture”, in which he gives precisely the same view on the origin
of species as that (presently to be alluded to) propounded by Mr.
Wallace and myself in the “Linnean Journal”, and as that enlarged in
the present volume. Unfortunately the view was given by Mr. Matthew
very briefly in scattered passages in an appendix to a work on a
different subject, so that it remained unnoticed until Mr. Matthew
himself drew attention to it in the “Gardeners’ Chronicle”, on April 7,
1860. The differences of Mr. Matthew’s views from mine are not of much
importance: he seems to consider that the world was nearly depopulated
at successive periods, and then restocked; and he gives as an
alternative, that new forms may be generated “without the presence of
any mold or germ of former aggregates.” I am not sure that I understand
some passages; but it seems that he attributes much influence to the
direct action of the conditions of life. He clearly saw, however, the
full force of the principle of natural selection.

The celebrated geologist and naturalist, Von Buch, in his excellent
“Description Physique des Isles Canaries” (1836, page 147), clearly
expresses his belief that varieties slowly become changed into
permanent species, which are no longer capable of intercrossing.

Rafinesque, in his “New Flora of North America”, published in 1836,
wrote (page 6) as follows: “All species might have been varieties once,
and many varieties are gradually becoming species by assuming constant
and peculiar characters;” but further on (page 18) he adds, “except the
original types or ancestors of the genus.”

In 1843-44 Professor Haldeman (“Boston Journal of Nat. Hist. U.
States”, vol. iv, page 468) has ably given the arguments for and
against the hypothesis of the development and modification of species:
he seems to lean toward the side of change.

The “Vestiges of Creation” appeared in 1844. In the tenth and much
improved edition (1853) the anonymous author says (page 155): “The
proposition determined on after much consideration is, that the several
series of animated beings, from the simplest and oldest up to the
highest and most recent, are, under the providence of God, the results,
_first_, of an impulse which has been imparted to the forms of life,
advancing them, in definite times, by generation, through grades of
organisation terminating in the highest dicotyledons and vertebrata,
these grades being few in number, and generally marked by intervals of
organic character, which we find to be a practical difficulty in
ascertaining affinities; _second_, of another impulse connected with
the vital forces, tending, in the course of generations, to modify
organic structures in accordance with external circumstances, as food,
the nature of the habitat, and the meteoric agencies, these being the
‘adaptations’ of the natural theologian.” The author apparently
believes that organisation progresses by sudden leaps, but that the
effects produced by the conditions of life are gradual. He argues with
much force on general grounds that species are not immutable
productions. But I cannot see how the two supposed “impulses” account
in a scientific sense for the numerous and beautiful coadaptations
which we see throughout nature; I cannot see that we thus gain any
insight how, for instance, a woodpecker has become adapted to its
peculiar habits of life. The work, from its powerful and brilliant
style, though displaying in the early editions little accurate
knowledge and a great want of scientific caution, immediately had a
very wide circulation. In my opinion it has done excellent service in
this country in calling attention to the subject, in removing
prejudice, and in thus preparing the ground for the reception of
analogous views.

In 1846 the veteran geologist M.J. d’Omalius d’Halloy published in an
excellent though short paper (“Bulletins de l’Acad. Roy. Bruxelles”,
tom. xiii, page 581) his opinion that it is more probable that new
species have been produced by descent with modification than that they
have been separately created: the author first promulgated this opinion
in 1831.

Professor Owen, in 1849 (“Nature of Limbs”, page 86), wrote as follows:
“The archetypal idea was manifested in the flesh under diverse such
modifications, upon this planet, long prior to the existence of those
animal species that actually exemplify it. To what natural laws or
secondary causes the orderly succession and progression of such organic
phenomena may have been committed, we, as yet, are ignorant.” In his
address to the British Association, in 1858, he speaks (page li) of
“the axiom of the continuous operation of creative power, or of the
ordained becoming of living things.” Further on (page xc), after
referring to geographical distribution, he adds, “These phenomena shake
our confidence in the conclusion that the Apteryx of New Zealand and
the Red Grouse of England were distinct creations in and for those
islands respectively. Always, also, it may be well to bear in mind that
by the word ‘creation’ the zoologist means ‘a process he knows not
what.’” He amplifies this idea by adding that when such cases as that
of the Red Grouse are “enumerated by the zoologist as evidence of
distinct creation of the bird in and for such islands, he chiefly
expresses that he knows not how the Red Grouse came to be there, and
there exclusively; signifying also, by this mode of expressing such
ignorance, his belief that both the bird and the islands owed their
origin to a great first Creative Cause.” If we interpret these
sentences given in the same address, one by the other, it appears that
this eminent philosopher felt in 1858 his confidence shaken that the
Apteryx and the Red Grouse first appeared in their respective homes “he
knew not how,” or by some process “he knew not what.”

This Address was delivered after the papers by Mr. Wallace and myself
on the Origin of Species, presently to be referred to, had been read
before the Linnean Society. When the first edition of this work was
published, I was so completely deceived, as were many others, by such
expressions as “the continuous operation of creative power,” that I
included Professor Owen with other palæontologists as being firmly
convinced of the immutability of species; but it appears (“Anat. of
Vertebrates”, vol. iii, page 796) that this was on my part a
preposterous error. In the last edition of this work I inferred, and
the inference still seems to me perfectly just, from a passage
beginning with the words “no doubt the type-form,” &c.(Ibid., vol. i,
page xxxv), that Professor Owen admitted that natural selection may
have done something in the formation of a new species; but this it
appears (Ibid., vol. iii. page 798) is inaccurate and without evidence.
I also gave some extracts from a correspondence between Professor Owen
and the editor of the “London Review”, from which it appeared manifest
to the editor as well as to myself, that Professor Owen claimed to have
promulgated the theory of natural selection before I had done so; and I
expressed my surprise and satisfaction at this announcement; but as far
as it is possible to understand certain recently published passages
(Ibid., vol. iii. page 798) I have either partially or wholly again
fallen into error. It is consolatory to me that others find Professor
Owen’s controversial writings as difficult to understand and to
reconcile with each other, as I do. As far as the mere enunciation of
the principle of natural selection is concerned, it is quite immaterial
whether or not Professor Owen preceded me, for both of us, as shown in
this historical sketch, were long ago preceded by Dr. Wells and Mr.
Matthews.

M. Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, in his lectures delivered in 1850
(of which a Résumé appeared in the “Revue et Mag. de Zoolog.”, Jan.,
1851), briefly gives his reason for believing that specific characters
“sont fixés, pour chaque espèce, tant qu’elle se perpétue au milieu des
mêmes circonstances: ils se modifient, si les circonstances ambiantes
viennent à changer. En résumé, _l’observation_ des animaux sauvages
démontre deja la variabilité _limitée_ des espèces. Les _expériences_
sur les animaux sauvages devenus domestiques, et sur les animaux
domestiques redevenus sauvages, la démontrent plus clairment encore.
Ces mêmes expériences prouvent, de plus, que les différences produites
peuvent être de _valeur générique_.” In his “Hist. Nat. Générale” (tom.
ii, page 430, 1859) he amplifies analogous conclusions.

From a circular lately issued it appears that Dr. Freke, in 1851
(“Dublin Medical Press”, page 322), propounded the doctrine that all
organic beings have descended from one primordial form. His grounds of
belief and treatment of the subject are wholly different from mine; but
as Dr. Freke has now (1861) published his Essay on the “Origin of
Species by means of Organic Affinity”, the difficult attempt to give
any idea of his views would be superfluous on my part.

Mr. Herbert Spencer, in an Essay (originally published in the “Leader”,
March, 1852, and republished in his “Essays”, in 1858), has contrasted
the theories of the Creation and the Development of organic beings with
remarkable skill and force. He argues from the analogy of domestic
productions, from the changes which the embryos of many species
undergo, from the difficulty of distinguishing species and varieties,
and from the principle of general gradation, that species have been
modified; and he attributes the modification to the change of
circumstances. The author (1855) has also treated Psychology on the
principle of the necessary acquirement of each mental power and
capacity by gradation.

In 1852 M. Naudin, a distinguished botanist, expressly stated, in an
admirable paper on the Origin of Species (“Revue Horticole”, page 102;
since partly republished in the “Nouvelles Archives du Muséum”, tom. i,
p. 171), his belief that species are formed in an analogous manner as
varieties are under cultivation; and the latter process he attributes
to man’s power of selection. But he does not show how selection acts
under nature. He believes, like Dean Herbert, that species, when
nascent, were more plastic than at present. He lays weight on what he
calls the principle of finality, “puissance mystérieuse, indéterminée;
fatalité pour les uns; pour les autres volonté providentielle, dont
l’action incessante sur les êtres vivantes détermine, à toutes les
époques de l’existence du monde, la forme, le volume, et la durée de
chacun d’eux, en raison de sa destinée dans l’ordre de choses dont il
fait partie. C’est cette puissance qui harmonise chaque membre à
l’ensemble, en l’appropriant à la fonction qu’il doit remplir dans
l’organisme général de la nature, fonction qui est pour lui sa raison
d’être.”[3]

 [3] From references in Bronn’s “Untersuchungen über die
 Entwickelungs-Gesetze”, it appears that the celebrated botanist and
 palæontologist Unger published, in 1852, his belief that species
 undergo development and modification. Dalton, likewise, in Pander and
 Dalton’s work on Fossil Sloths, expressed, in 1821, a similar belief.
 Similar views have, as is well known, been maintained by Oken in his
 mystical “Natur-Philosophie”. From other references in Godron’s work
 “Sur l’Espèce”, it seems that Bory St. Vincent, Burdach, Poiret and
 Fries, have all admitted that new species are continually being
 produced.
    I may add, that of the thirty-four authors named in this Historical
    Sketch, who believe in the modification of species, or at least
    disbelieve in separate acts of creation, twenty-seven have written
    on special branches of natural history or geology.


In 1853 a celebrated geologist, Count Keyserling (“Bulletin de la Soc.
Geolog.”, 2nd Ser., tom. x, page 357), suggested that as new diseases,
supposed to have been caused by some miasma have arisen and spread over
the world, so at certain periods the germs of existing species may have
been chemically affected by circumambient molecules of a particular
nature, and thus have given rise to new forms.

In this same year, 1853, Dr. Schaaffhausen published an excellent
pamphlet (“Verhand. des Naturhist. Vereins der Preuss. Rheinlands”,
&c.), in which he maintains the development of organic forms on the
earth. He infers that many species have kept true for long periods,
whereas a few have become modified. The distinction of species he
explains by the destruction of intermediate graduated forms. “Thus
living plants and animals are not separated from the extinct by new
creations, but are to be regarded as their descendants through
continued reproduction.”

A well-known French botanist, M. Lecoq, writes in 1854 (“Etudes sur
Géograph.” Bot. tom. i, page 250), “On voit que nos recherches sur la
fixité ou la variation de l’espéce, nous conduisent directement aux
idées émises par deux hommes justement célèbres, Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire
et Goethe.” Some other passages scattered through M. Lecoq’s large work
make it a little doubtful how far he extends his views on the
modification of species.

The “Philosophy of Creation” has been treated in a masterly manner by
the Rev. Baden Powell, in his “Essays on the Unity of Worlds”, 1855.
Nothing can be more striking than the manner in which he shows that the
introduction of new species is “a regular, not a casual phenomenon,”
or, as Sir John Herschel expresses it, “a natural in contradistinction
to a miraculous process.”

The third volume of the “Journal of the Linnean Society” contains
papers, read July 1, 1858, by Mr. Wallace and myself, in which, as
stated in the introductory remarks to this volume, the theory of
Natural Selection is promulgated by Mr. Wallace with admirable force
and clearness.

Von Baer, toward whom all zoologists feel so profound a respect,
expressed about the year 1859 (see Prof. Rudolph Wagner,
“Zoologisch-Anthropologische Untersuchungen”, 1861, s. 51) his
conviction, chiefly grounded on the laws of geographical distribution,
that forms now perfectly distinct have descended from a single
parent-form.

In June, 1859, Professor Huxley gave a lecture before the Royal
Institution on the ‘Persistent Types of Animal Life’. Referring to such
cases, he remarks, “It is difficult to comprehend the meaning of such
facts as these, if we suppose that each species of animal and plant, or
each great type of organisation, was formed and placed upon the surface
of the globe at long intervals by a distinct act of creative power; and
it is well to recollect that such an assumption is as unsupported by
tradition or revelation as it is opposed to the general analogy of
nature. If, on the other hand, we view ‘Persistent Types’ in relation
to that hypothesis which supposes the species living at any time to be
the result of the gradual modification of pre-existing species, a
hypothesis which, though unproven, and sadly damaged by some of its
supporters, is yet the only one to which physiology lends any
countenance; their existence would seem to show that the amount of
modification which living beings have undergone during geological time
is but very small in relation to the whole series of changes which they
have suffered.”

In December, 1859, Dr. Hooker published his “Introduction to the
Australian Flora”. In the first part of this great work he admits the
truth of the descent and modification of species, and supports this
doctrine by many original observations.

The first edition of this work was published on November 24, 1859, and
the second edition on January 7, 1860.




Contents


AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE PROGRESS OF OPINION ON THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES
INTRODUCTION.

CHAPTER I. VARIATION UNDER DOMESTICATION
CHAPTER II. VARIATION UNDER NATURE
CHAPTER III. STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE
CHAPTER IV. NATURAL SELECTION; OR THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST
CHAPTER V. LAWS OF VARIATION
CHAPTER VI. DIFFICULTIES OF THE THEORY
CHAPTER VII. MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTIONS TO THE THEORY OF NATURAL SELECTION
CHAPTER VIII. INSTINCT
CHAPTER IX. HYBRIDISM
CHAPTER X. ON THE IMPERFECTION OF THE GEOLOGICAL RECORD
CHAPTER XI. ON THE GEOLOGICAL SUCCESSION OF ORGANIC BEINGS
CHAPTER XII. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION
CHAPTER XIII. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION—continued
CHAPTER XIV. MUTUAL AFFINITIES OF ORGANIC BEINGS
CHAPTER XV. RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION

GLOSSARY OF THE PRINCIPAL SCIENTIFIC TERMS USED IN THE PRESENT VOLUME.
INDEX.




DETAILED CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER I.
VARIATION UNDER DOMESTICATION.
Causes of Variability—Effects of Habit and the use or disuse of
Parts—Correlated Variation—Inheritance—Character of Domestic
Varieties—Difficulty of distinguishing between Varieties and
Species—Origin of Domestic Varieties from one or more Species—Domestic
Pigeons, their Differences and Origin—Principles of Selection,
anciently followed, their Effects—Methodical and Unconscious
Selection—Unknown Origin of our Domestic Productions—Circumstances
favourable to Man’s power of Selection.

CHAPTER II.
VARIATION UNDER NATURE.
Variability—Individual Differences—Doubtful species—Wide ranging, much
diffused, and common species, vary most—Species of the larger genera in
each country vary more frequently than the species of the smaller
genera—Many of the species of the larger genera resemble varieties in
being very closely, but unequally, related to each other, and in having
restricted ranges.

CHAPTER III.
STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE.
Its bearing on natural selection—The term used in a wide
sense—Geometrical ratio of increase—Rapid increase of naturalised
animals and plants—Nature of the checks to increase—Competition
universal—Effects of climate—Protection from the number of
individuals—Complex relations of all animals and plants throughout
nature—Struggle for life most severe between individuals and varieties
of the same species; often severe between species of the same genus—The
relation of organism to organism the most important of all relations.

CHAPTER IV.
NATURAL SELECTION; OR THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST.
Natural Selection—its power compared with man’s selection—its power on
characters of trifling importance—its power at all ages and on both
sexes—Sexual Selection—On the generality of intercrosses between
individuals of the same species—Circumstances favourable and
unfavourable to the results of Natural Selection, namely,
intercrossing, isolation, number of individuals—Slow action—Extinction
caused by Natural Selection—Divergence of Character, related to the
diversity of inhabitants of any small area and to naturalisation—Action
of Natural Selection, through Divergence of Character and Extinction,
on the descendants from a common parent—Explains the Grouping of all
organic beings—Advance in organisation—Low forms preserved—Convergence
of character—Indefinite multiplication of species—Summary.

CHAPTER V.
LAWS OF VARIATION.
Effects of changed conditions—Use and disuse, combined with natural
selection; organs of flight and of vision—Acclimatisation—Correlated
variation—Compensation and economy of growth—False
correlations—Multiple, rudimentary, and lowly organised structures
variable—Parts developed in an unusual manner are highly variable;
specific characters more variable than generic; secondary sexual
characters variable—Species of the same genus vary in an analogous
manner—Reversions to long-lost characters—Summary.

CHAPTER VI.
DIFFICULTIES OF THE THEORY.
Difficulties of the theory of descent with modification—Absence or
rarity of transitional varieties—Transitions in habits of
life—Diversified habits in the same species—Species with habits widely
different from those of their allies—Organs of extreme perfection—Modes
of transition—Cases of difficulty—Natura non facit saltum—Organs of
small importance—Organs not in all cases absolutely perfect—The law of
Unity of Type and of the Conditions of Existence embraced by the theory
of Natural Selection.

CHAPTER VII.
MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTIONS TO THE THEORY OF NATURAL SELECTION.
Longevity—Modifications not necessarily simultaneous—Modifications
apparently of no direct service—Progressive development—Characters of
small functional importance, the most constant—Supposed incompetence of
natural selection to account for the incipient stages of useful
structures—Causes which interfere with the acquisition through natural
selection of useful structures—Gradations of structure with changed
functions—Widely different organs in members of the same class,
developed from one and the same source—Reasons for disbelieving in
great and abrupt modifications.

CHAPTER VIII.
INSTINCT.
Instincts comparable with habits, but different in their
origin—Instincts graduated—Aphides and ants—Instincts variable—Domestic
instincts, their origin—Natural instincts of the cuckoo, molothrus,
ostrich, and parasitic bees—Slave-making ants—Hive-bee, its cell-making
instinct—Changes of instinct and structure not necessarily
simultaneous—Difficulties on the theory of the Natural Selection of
instincts—Neuter or sterile insects—Summary.

CHAPTER IX.
HYBRIDISM.
Distinction between the sterility of first crosses and of
hybrids—Sterility various in degree, not universal, affected by close
interbreeding, removed by domestication—Laws governing the sterility of
hybrids—Sterility not a special endowment, but incidental on other
differences, not accumulated by natural selection—Causes of the
sterility of first crosses and of hybrids—Parallelism between the
effects of changed conditions of life and of crossing—Dimorphism and
Trimorphism—Fertility of varieties when crossed and of their mongrel
offspring not universal—Hybrids and mongrels compared independently of
their fertility—Summary.

CHAPTER X.
ON THE IMPERFECTION OF THE GEOLOGICAL RECORD.
On the absence of intermediate varieties at the present day—On the
nature of extinct intermediate varieties; on their number—On the lapse
of time, as inferred from the rate of denudation and of deposition—On
the lapse of time as estimated in years—On the poorness of our
palæontological collections—On the intermittence of geological
formations—On the denudation of granitic areas—On the absence of
intermediate varieties in any one formation—On the sudden appearance of
groups of species—On their sudden appearance in the lowest known
fossiliferous strata—Antiquity of the habitable earth.

CHAPTER XI.
ON THE GEOLOGICAL SUCCESSION OF ORGANIC BEINGS.
On the slow and successive appearance of new species—On their different
rates of change—Species once lost do not reappear—Groups of species
follow the same general rules in their appearance and disappearance as
do single species—On extinction—On simultaneous changes in the forms of
life throughout the world—On the affinities of extinct species to each
other and to living species—On the state of development of ancient
forms—On the succession of the same types within the same areas—Summary
of preceding and present chapter.

CHAPTER XII.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.
Present distribution cannot be accounted for by differences in physical
conditions—Importance of barriers—Affinity of the productions of the
same continent—Centres of creation—Means of dispersal by changes of
climate and of the level of the land, and by occasional means—Dispersal
during the Glacial period—Alternate Glacial periods in the north and
south.

CHAPTER XIII.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION—_continued_.
Distribution of fresh-water productions—On the inhabitants of oceanic
islands—Absence of Batrachians and of terrestrial Mammals—On the
relation of the inhabitants of islands to those of the nearest
mainland—On colonisation from the nearest source with subsequent
modification—Summary of the last and present chapter.

CHAPTER XIV.
MUTUAL AFFINITIES OF ORGANIC BEINGS:
MORPHOLOGY: EMBRYOLOGY: RUDIMENTARY ORGANS.
Classification, groups subordinate to groups—Natural system—Rules and
difficulties in classification, explained on the theory of descent with
modification—Classification of varieties—Descent always used in
classification—Analogical or adaptive characters—Affinities, general,
complex and radiating—Extinction separates and defines
groups—Morphology, between members of the same class, between parts of
the same individual—Embryology, laws of, explained by variations not
supervening at an early age, and being inherited at a corresponding
age—Rudimentary Organs; their origin explained—Summary.

CHAPTER XV.
RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION.
Recapitulation of the objections to the theory of Natural
Selection—Recapitulation of the general and special circumstances in
its favour—Causes of the general belief in the immutability of
species—How far the theory of Natural Selection may be extended—Effects
of its adoption on the study of Natural history—Concluding remarks.

GLOSSARY OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS.

INDEX.




ORIGIN OF SPECIES.




INTRODUCTION.


When on board H.M.S. Beagle, as naturalist, I was much struck with
certain facts in the distribution of the organic beings inhabiting
South America, and in the geological relations of the present to the
past inhabitants of that continent. These facts, as will be seen in the
latter chapters of this volume, seemed to throw some light on the
origin of species—that mystery of mysteries, as it has been called by
one of our greatest philosophers. On my return home, it occurred to me,
in 1837, that something might perhaps be made out on this question by
patiently accumulating and reflecting on all sorts of facts which could
possibly have any bearing on it. After five years’ work I allowed
myself to speculate on the subject, and drew up some short notes; these
I enlarged in 1844 into a sketch of the conclusions, which then seemed
to me probable: from that period to the present day I have steadily
pursued the same object. I hope that I may be excused for entering on
these personal details, as I give them to show that I have not been
hasty in coming to a decision.

My work is now (1859) nearly finished; but as it will take me many more
years to complete it, and as my health is far from strong, I have been
urged to publish this abstract. I have more especially been induced to
do this, as Mr. Wallace, who is now studying the natural history of the
Malay Archipelago, has arrived at almost exactly the same general
conclusions that I have on the origin of species. In 1858 he sent me a
memoir on this subject, with a request that I would forward it to Sir
Charles Lyell, who sent it to the Linnean Society, and it is published
in the third volume of the Journal of that Society. Sir C. Lyell and
Dr. Hooker, who both knew of my work—the latter having read my sketch
of 1844—honoured me by thinking it advisable to publish, with Mr.
Wallace’s excellent memoir, some brief extracts from my manuscripts.

This abstract, which I now publish, must necessarily be imperfect. I
cannot here give references and authorities for my several statements;
and I must trust to the reader reposing some confidence in my accuracy.
No doubt errors may have crept in, though I hope I have always been
cautious in trusting to good authorities alone. I can here give only
the general conclusions at which I have arrived, with a few facts in
illustration, but which, I hope, in most cases will suffice. No one can
feel more sensible than I do of the necessity of hereafter publishing
in detail all the facts, with references, on which my conclusions have
been grounded; and I hope in a future work to do this. For I am well
aware that scarcely a single point is discussed in this volume on which
facts cannot be adduced, often apparently leading to conclusions
directly opposite to those at which I have arrived. A fair result can
be obtained only by fully stating and balancing the facts and arguments
on both sides of each question; and this is here impossible.

I much regret that want of space prevents my having the satisfaction of
acknowledging the generous assistance which I have received from very
many naturalists, some of them personally unknown to me. I cannot,
however, let this opportunity pass without expressing my deep
obligations to Dr. Hooker, who, for the last fifteen years, has aided
me in every possible way by his large stores of knowledge and his
excellent judgment.

In considering the origin of species, it is quite conceivable that a
naturalist, reflecting on the mutual affinities of organic beings, on
their embryological relations, their geographical distribution,
geological succession, and other such facts, might come to the
conclusion that species had not been independently created, but had
descended, like varieties, from other species. Nevertheless, such a
conclusion, even if well founded, would be unsatisfactory, until it
could be shown how the innumerable species, inhabiting this world have
been modified, so as to acquire that perfection of structure and
coadaptation which justly excites our admiration. Naturalists
continually refer to external conditions, such as climate, food, &c.,
as the only possible cause of variation. In one limited sense, as we
shall hereafter see, this may be true; but it is preposterous to
attribute to mere external conditions, the structure, for instance, of
the woodpecker, with its feet, tail, beak, and tongue, so admirably
adapted to catch insects under the bark of trees. In the case of the
mistletoe, which draws its nourishment from certain trees, which has
seeds that must be transported by certain birds, and which has flowers
with separate sexes absolutely requiring the agency of certain insects
to bring pollen from one flower to the other, it is equally
preposterous to account for the structure of this parasite, with its
relations to several distinct organic beings, by the effects of
external conditions, or of habit, or of the volition of the plant
itself.

It is, therefore, of the highest importance to gain a clear insight
into the means of modification and coadaptation. At the commencement of
my observations it seemed to me probable that a careful study of
domesticated animals and of cultivated plants would offer the best
chance of making out this obscure problem. Nor have I been
disappointed; in this and in all other perplexing cases I have
invariably found that our knowledge, imperfect though it be, of
variation under domestication, afforded the best and safest clue. I may
venture to express my conviction of the high value of such studies,
although they have been very commonly neglected by naturalists.

From these considerations, I shall devote the first chapter of this
abstract to variation under domestication. We shall thus see that a
large amount of hereditary modification is at least possible; and, what
is equally or more important, we shall see how great is the power of
man in accumulating by his selection successive slight variations. I
will then pass on to the variability of species in a state of nature;
but I shall, unfortunately, be compelled to treat this subject far too
briefly, as it can be treated properly only by giving long catalogues
of facts. We shall, however, be enabled to discuss what circumstances
are most favourable to variation. In the next chapter the struggle for
existence among all organic beings throughout the world, which
inevitably follows from the high geometrical ratio of their increase,
will be considered. This is the doctrine of Malthus, applied to the
whole animal and vegetable kingdoms. As many more individuals of each
species are born than can possibly survive; and as, consequently, there
is a frequently recurring struggle for existence, it follows that any
being, if it vary however slightly in any manner profitable to itself,
under the complex and sometimes varying conditions of life, will have a
better chance of surviving, and thus be _naturally selected_. From the
strong principle of inheritance, any selected variety will tend to
propagate its new and modified form.

This fundamental subject of natural selection will be treated at some
length in the fourth chapter; and we shall then see how natural
selection almost inevitably causes much extinction of the less improved
forms of life, and leads to what I have called divergence of character.
In the next chapter I shall discuss the complex and little known laws
of variation. In the five succeeding chapters, the most apparent and
gravest difficulties in accepting the theory will be given: namely,
first, the difficulties of transitions, or how a simple being or a
simple organ can be changed and perfected into a highly developed being
or into an elaborately constructed organ; secondly the subject of
instinct, or the mental powers of animals; thirdly, hybridism, or the
infertility of species and the fertility of varieties when
intercrossed; and fourthly, the imperfection of the geological record.
In the next chapter I shall consider the geological succession of
organic beings throughout time; in the twelfth and thirteenth, their
geographical distribution throughout space; in the fourteenth, their
classification or mutual affinities, both when mature and in an
embryonic condition. In the last chapter I shall give a brief
recapitulation of the whole work, and a few concluding remarks.

No one ought to feel surprise at much remaining as yet unexplained in
regard to the origin of species and varieties, if he make due allowance
for our profound ignorance in regard to the mutual relations of the
many beings which live around us. Who can explain why one species
ranges widely and is very numerous, and why another allied species has
a narrow range and is rare? Yet these relations are of the highest
importance, for they determine the present welfare and, as I believe,
the future success and modification of every inhabitant of this world.
Still less do we know of the mutual relations of the innumerable
inhabitants of the world during the many past geological epochs in its
history. Although much remains obscure, and will long remain obscure, I
can entertain no doubt, after the most deliberate study and
dispassionate judgment of which I am capable, that the view which most
naturalists until recently entertained, and which I formerly
entertained—namely, that each species has been independently created—is
erroneous. I am fully convinced that species are not immutable; but
that those belonging to what are called the same genera are lineal
descendants of some other and generally extinct species, in the same
manner as the acknowledged varieties of any one species are the
descendants of that species. Furthermore, I am convinced that natural
selection has been the most important, but not the exclusive, means of
modification.




CHAPTER I.
VARIATION UNDER DOMESTICATION.


Causes of Variability—Effects of Habit and the use and disuse of
Parts—Correlated Variation—Inheritance—Character of Domestic
Varieties—Difficulty of distinguishing between Varieties and
Species—Origin of Domestic Varieties from one or more Species—Domestic
Pigeons, their Differences and Origin—Principles of Selection,
anciently followed, their Effects—Methodical and Unconscious
Selection—Unknown Origin of our Domestic Productions—Circumstances
favourable to Man’s power of Selection.


_Causes of Variability._


When we compare the individuals of the same variety or sub-variety of
our older cultivated plants and animals, one of the first points which
strikes us is, that they generally differ more from each other than do
the individuals of any one species or variety in a state of nature. And
if we reflect on the vast diversity of the plants and animals which
have been cultivated, and which have varied during all ages under the
most different climates and treatment, we are driven to conclude that
this great variability is due to our domestic productions having been
raised under conditions of life not so uniform as, and somewhat
different from, those to which the parent species had been exposed
under nature. There is, also, some probability in the view propounded
by Andrew Knight, that this variability may be partly connected with
excess of food. It seems clear that organic beings must be exposed
during several generations to new conditions to cause any great amount
of variation; and that, when the organisation has once begun to vary,
it generally continues varying for many generations. No case is on
record of a variable organism ceasing to vary under cultivation. Our
oldest cultivated plants, such as wheat, still yield new varieties: our
oldest domesticated animals are still capable of rapid improvement or
modification.

As far as I am able to judge, after long attending to the subject, the
conditions of life appear to act in two ways—directly on the whole
organisation or on certain parts alone and in directly by affecting the
reproductive system. With respect to the direct action, we must bear in
mind that in every case, as Professor Weismann has lately insisted, and
as I have incidently shown in my work on “Variation under
Domestication,” there are two factors: namely, the nature of the
organism and the nature of the conditions. The former seems to be much
the more important; for nearly similar variations sometimes arise
under, as far as we can judge, dissimilar conditions; and, on the other
hand, dissimilar variations arise under conditions which appear to be
nearly uniform. The effects on the offspring are either definite or in
definite. They may be considered as definite when all or nearly all the
offspring of individuals exposed to certain conditions during several
generations are modified in the same manner. It is extremely difficult
to come to any conclusion in regard to the extent of the changes which
have been thus definitely induced. There can, however, be little doubt
about many slight changes, such as size from the amount of food, colour
from the nature of the food, thickness of the skin and hair from
climate, &c. Each of the endless variations which we see in the plumage
of our fowls must have had some efficient cause; and if the same cause
were to act uniformly during a long series of generations on many
individuals, all probably would be modified in the same manner. Such
facts as the complex and extraordinary out growths which variably
follow from the insertion of a minute drop of poison by a
gall-producing insect, shows us what singular modifications might
result in the case of plants from a chemical change in the nature of
the sap.

In definite variability is a much more common result of changed
conditions than definite variability, and has probably played a more
important part in the formation of our domestic races. We see in
definite variability in the endless slight peculiarities which
distinguish the individuals of the same species, and which cannot be
accounted for by inheritance from either parent or from some more
remote ancestor. Even strongly-marked differences occasionally appear
in the young of the same litter, and in seedlings from the same
seed-capsule. At long intervals of time, out of millions of individuals
reared in the same country and fed on nearly the same food, deviations
of structure so strongly pronounced as to deserve to be called
monstrosities arise; but monstrosities cannot be separated by any
distinct line from slighter variations. All such changes of structure,
whether extremely slight or strongly marked, which appear among many
individuals living together, may be considered as the in definite
effects of the conditions of life on each individual organism, in
nearly the same manner as the chill effects different men in an in
definite manner, according to their state of body or constitution,
causing coughs or colds, rheumatism, or inflammation of various organs.

With respect to what I have called the in direct action of changed
conditions, namely, through the reproductive system of being affected,
we may infer that variability is thus induced, partly from the fact of
this system being extremely sensitive to any change in the conditions,
and partly from the similarity, as Kölreuter and others have remarked,
between the variability which follows from the crossing of distinct
species, and that which may be observed with plants and animals when
reared under new or unnatural conditions. Many facts clearly show how
eminently susceptible the reproductive system is to very slight changes
in the surrounding conditions. Nothing is more easy than to tame an
animal, and few things more difficult than to get it to breed freely
under confinement, even when the male and female unite. How many
animals there are which will not breed, though kept in an almost free
state in their native country! This is generally, but erroneously
attributed to vitiated instincts. Many cultivated plants display the
utmost vigour, and yet rarely or never seed! In some few cases it has
been discovered that a very trifling change, such as a little more or
less water at some particular period of growth, will determine whether
or not a plant will produce seeds. I cannot here give the details which
I have collected and elsewhere published on this curious subject; but
to show how singular the laws are which determine the reproduction of
animals under confinement, I may mention that carnivorous animals, even
from the tropics, breed in this country pretty freely under
confinement, with the exception of the plantigrades or bear family,
which seldom produce young; whereas, carnivorous birds, with the rarest
exception, hardly ever lay fertile eggs. Many exotic plants have pollen
utterly worthless, in the same condition as in the most sterile
hybrids. When, on the one hand, we see domesticated animals and plants,
though often weak and sickly, breeding freely under confinement; and
when, on the other hand, we see individuals, though taken young from a
state of nature perfectly tamed, long-lived, and healthy (of which I
could give numerous instances), yet having their reproductive system so
seriously affected by unperceived causes as to fail to act, we need not
be surprised at this system, when it does act under confinement, acting
irregularly, and producing offspring somewhat unlike their parents. I
may add that as some organisms breed freely under the most unnatural
conditions—for instance, rabbits and ferrets kept in hutches—showing
that their reproductive organs are not easily affected; so will some
animals and plants withstand domestication or cultivation, and vary
very slightly—perhaps hardly more than in a state of nature.

Some naturalists have maintained that all variations are connected with
the act of sexual reproduction; but this is certainly an error; for I
have given in another work a long list of “sporting plants;” as they
are called by gardeners; that is, of plants which have suddenly
produced a single bud with a new and sometimes widely different
character from that of the other buds on the same plant. These bud
variations, as they may be named, can be propagated by grafts, offsets,
&c., and sometimes by seed. They occur rarely under nature, but are far
from rare under culture. As a single bud out of many thousands produced
year after year on the same tree under uniform conditions, has been
known suddenly to assume a new character; and as buds on distinct
trees, growing under different conditions, have sometimes yielded
nearly the same variety—for instance, buds on peach-trees producing
